on this Thursday night a tragedy at sea
a fatal Canadian military helicopter
crash off the coast of Greece tributes
to the dead and missing all of them our
heroes a complicated search and the
mission they were on Global News
investigation new red flags raised about
how China rounded up tons of personal
protective equipment the drug showing
promise to treat Co mid-nineteen what it
does and why it's not a cure and a
momentous day for a magnificent man the
world celebrates captain Tom Moore your
heroic efforts have lifted the spirits
of the entire nation
global national with Donna freezin
good evening and thanks for joining us
we begin with what we know about the
crash of a Canadian military helicopter
off the coast of Greece the families of
six Canadians got the terrible news
today that helicopter went down while on
a training mission one person is
confirmed dead the search is continuing
for five others they are sub leftenant
Matthew Pike a naval weapons officer
from Nova Scotia captain Brendan Ian
McDonald's a pilot also from Nova Scotia
captain Kevin Hagen from BC also a pilot
air combat systems officer captain
Maxine Merrill Moran from Quebec and
master corporal Matthew cousins an
airborne electronic sensor operator from
Ontario and sub leftenant
Abigail Cobra is confirmed to have died
the 23 year old from Nova Scotia was a
member of the Royal Canadian Navy her
father said in a Facebook post he is
shattered knowing we won't have this
smile in our lives anymore she loved her
job her life and most of all her friends
and family it is not clear what happened
the military says the helicopter went
down in the Ionian Sea yesterday as it
was returning to HMCS Fredericton the
flight data and voice recorders have
been recovered and an intense search is
underway for the missing all of this has
added another layer of agony to Nova
Scotia
Ross Lord is in Halifax with our top
story tonight friends and family say
Abigail Cobra was a credit to her
community at her country better known as
Abby she was a young Navy sailor had
accomplished 23 year old musician active
in her Nova Scotia church she was
excellent on the bagpipes compassionate
and everything she did
[Music]
last week sub leftenant Cobra performed
a musical tribute onboard HMCS
Fredericton honoring the 22 victims of
the Nova Scotia mass shooting she did
that from the fo'c'sle of the
Fredericton while deployed for everybody
in Nova Scotia and here we are only to
certain days later paying that tribute
back to her it just doesn't seem right
there were five other people on the
cyclone helicopter that crashed off the
coast of Greece each of them will leave
a void that cannot be filled on behalf
of all Canadians I want to offer my
deepest support to their families their
friends their shipmates and their fellow
CAF members this is another very hard
day for Halifax for Nova Scotia
and for our armed forces families the
chopper with the military callsign
Stalker was returning to HMCS
Fredericton during a training exercise
before sundown at approximately 6:52
p.m. the ship lost contact with aircrew
and a few minutes later flares were
spotted in the water the military calls
the crash an accident we remain in
contact with Italy Greece the United
States and Turkey who are assisting us
in the search and rescue efforts to help
us find the Cain Iran forces members who
are on the helicopter water temperatures
in the search area are much warmer than
they are here in the North Atlantic what
a pilot who's flown military choppers in
the Mediterranean says there are other
complications the Ionian Basin is the
deepest portion of the Mediterranean
which can pose a problem if there's the
aircraft has gone to the bottom it is
going to be an issue with locating where
the wreckage is and also perhaps any
recovery attempts are going to be
hampered by the depth the entire fleet
of cyclones on the east and west coast
has been placed on an operational pause
which means the choppers will not fly
anywhere until the military rules out
any fleet wide problem
Ross Lord global news Halifax the
Sikorsky cyclone helicopter has been in
use by the Canadian Armed Forces since
in 18 it replaced the 50 year old sea
kings the Cyclones were originally
ordered in 2004 but the
multibillion-dollar program was plagued
by years of delays and cost overruns
they have been deployed on five overseas
missions with the Navy and used for
surveillance search and rescue and
tactical transport for operations
supporting national and international
security efforts they are praised for
their state-of-the-art technology I
don't have any concerns about the
helicopter it's performed
terrifically it's got nine thousand
hours on the fleet we've had one other
incident which was a hard landing a
little while ago but that was because of
a very unusual gust of wind that knocked
the helicopter around the helicopter and
HMCS Fredericton were halfway through a
six-month deployment to help NATO keep
Russia from interfering with European
security as military families grieve
members of the armed forces are doing
critical work keeping people in
long-term care homes alive more teams of
soldiers are being deployed to Quebec
nursing homes the expanded operation
means soldiers will be helping in up to
20 Quebec care homes within the next few
weeks
Quebec first asked for military help in
five overwhelmed facilities earlier this
month
the virus though kept spreading and the
crisis is now much worse the province
says 280 care homes are now dealing with
outbreaks and 4400 residents are
confirmed to be infected one of the
hardest hit facilities in Quebec is the
Saint Dorothy public long term care home
in Laval at least 193 residents there
have tested positive for the virus
that's more than 80 percent of the
people who live there and 88 of them
have died here's a snapshot of the
situation across Canada today more than
1,600 new cases have been confirmed and
the virus has now officially reached all
corners of the country
none of it confirmed its first case
today New Brunswick had another day the
12th with no new cases a number of other
provinces also reported no new
infections the bulk of the new cases are
still concentrated in Quebec and Ontario
and Ontario had a bad
today it recorded the highest daily
death toll 86 people in the last 24
hours Premier Doug Ford says the curve
though is flattening and he says he's
feeling more optimistic about reopening
the economy there's a light at the end
of the tunnel and I am laser focused
right now on opening things up as
quickly as we can in a safe and measured
way Ford has not said any specific dates
for reopening though but his government
did release more guidance today for how
businesses can safely get going it
includes recommendations like installing
Plexiglas and putting markers on the
ground to encourage physical distancing
until those things happen many
businesses keep struggling and bills are
piling up rent is due tomorrow
some say they can't afford to pay the
federal government rolled out a new
commercial rent relief program last week
it's supposed to lower rent by 75% for
those that qualify but the organization
representing small businesses says not
everyone will they conducted a survey of
businesses that reported needing help
with rent thirty-eight percent said they
do not qualify for the program of those
that do 9 percent said their landlords
won't participate so they won't get any
relief Mike Gurule has more on the
frustrations as rent day arrives in
Almonte Ontario when Equator Coffee
closed its doors for physical distancing
they opened their eyes to a new business
model we got a new website up and
running owner amber hall had to adapt
but not enough revenue is coming in to
pay the bills and with two Equator
locations in Ottawa closed down she saw
the rental assistance program or secret
as a way to save her business her to
Ottawa landlords ultimately agreed to
share in the economic pain but in
Almonte
she's a landlord as well and when only
one of those businesses qualified for
the program she had a decision to make
but the one that's dropped fifty to
sixty percent it's not going to help
them so thankfully we were able to give
them relief anyhow but not through that
program it's the details of that program
that are causing headaches for mark
tardif in Courtenay BC he hasn't sold
much furniture of light and he's paying
rent from his savings secret could be
what saves him in theory if his landlord
agrees but in practice the program won't
be up and running until mid-may I'm
really hopeful but but I haven't had a
good indication yet they're not they
want to see the fine print I don't blame
them and I mean their business too I
think reasonable people should be
working this out in a reasonable way but
as a landlord you can appreciate that
you've got bills to pay you may not be
able to afford to extend 75% to your
tenant and many haven't small business
in crisis not CA has been unofficially
tracking closures every province has
been affected but it's when you zoom in
on Vancouver and then in Ontario and
ultimately the Golden Horseshoe that you
can see how many businesses are in peril
the federal government is bullish on
secret making a difference it will
evolve they say but it will take time
and cooperation and I would encourage
Canadian landlords to also act in a
responsible way in a way which is
supporting fellow Canadians microlight
Global News Toronto some new numbers are
out on what the pandemic is doing to the
federal deficit the PPO the
parliamentary budget watchdog estimates
the deficit will soar to almost 25
billion dollars this fiscal year and
then could skyrocket to two hundred and
fifty two point 1 billion the next year
that would be the largest budgetary
deficit since the mid-60s the numbers
could climb higher depending on how long
emergency public health measures remain
in place the PPO estimates
real GDP will shrink by 12% this year
pushing the federal debt to GDP ratio to
forty eight point four percent it
predicts once the federal emergency
assistance measures and and the economy
hopefully recovers that ratio should
stabilize well before most Canadians
knew anything about a shortage in
personal protective equipment a global
news investigation has found an
operation was underway to gather up as
much as possible and send it to China in
mid-january Chinese
consulates in Canada and around the
world put out a call to Chinese
nationals to help build a stockpile at
the same time as China was downplaying
the seriousness of the virus abigail
Beeman explains every overseas Chinese
is a warrior reads this state media
report from early February saying
Chinese nationals across the world raced
against time to send back batches of
scarce supplies for the motherland
it was mid-january when China put out an
urgent call for help for themselves
while hiding the severity of the new
coronavirus that would hit the rest of
the world
it's a machine for charm offensives but
it is also it's it's fundamentally a
political warfare operation author and
journalist Jonathan Mann Thorp is
talking about the United Front work
department a powerful Chinese government
agency used to influence Chinese
immigrants worldwide in just six weeks
China gathered two and a half billion
pieces of personal protective equipment
including from Canada where they used
consulates state owned businesses and
United Front community associations to
send back at least a hundred tons
according to Chinese reports a 2018 CSIS
report says the United Front has
frequently been a means of facilitating
espionage and CSIS and our CMP sources
tell global news some of the community
organizations reportedly involved appear
to have members previously monitored or
investigated by Canadian officials to me
it is utterly unconscionable but here
are Canadians who are being intimidated
and pressured in their own country by
foreign agents that's what I learned
that some PPE suppliers told the federal
government in late January that China
was trying to corner the global PPE
market Conservative MP Erin O'Toole says
the federal government knew early but
didn't act neither Health Canada nor the
Prime Minister would directly answer
questions from Global News about China's
actions our intelligence services were
tracking and aware of the issues and we
got regular updates through the month of
January
further than that III don't have
anything that O'Toole is calling for two
inquiries one about ottawa's handling
the other a wider assessment with help
from five eyes allies so it's up to the
free world to hold China and global
bodies to account a united front report
from March pushes back saying groups are
now donating PPE to other countries and
to Chinese nationals overseas Chinese
consulates and community organizations
did not respond to Global News questions
Abigail Beeman Global News Ottawa in the
American state of Michigan hundreds of
people some carrying guns are protesting
the state of emergency in place there
because of kovat 19 they marched on the
State Capitol building as lawmakers
debated extending emergency measures
some of them forced their way in yelling
at senators on the floor below to reopen
businesses and end the stay at home
orders an experimental antiviral drug
originally tested as a treatment for
Ebola and other corona viruses like SARS
is being fast-tracked by the u.s. it's
called REM des vir it's not a cure and
it won't prevent infection but small
clinical trials have shown it can help
some patients Jackson prosecco explains
what it is and why it might be the best
hope right now a potential treatment for
the sickest of the sick the experimental
drug REM de severe may be effective in
helping Co vid 19 patients recover
faster it got real for me when I on when
I laid down Sunday night couldn't
breathe 29 year old Drew MacDonald was
seriously ill when he was given the
treatment as part of a clinical trial by
the time I left the hospital I was
already improving drastically the
initial results in patients around the
world are similar on average patients
recovered in 11 days compared to 15 days
for those given the placebo the death
rate in patients given the drug was 8%
compared to 11% for those who weren't
this is not the total answer by any
means but it's a very important first
step
the drug was originally developed to
treat Ebola researchers at the
University of Alberta discovered it
could also work on kovat 19 we have
shown
Ramdas avea inhibits this engine of the
virus and it works in in essence in such
a way that the engine needs gas but with
ram Desi v it actually gets diesel but
there are strong caveat it is not a
vaccine and it won't stop corona virus
from spreading person-to-person right
now the treatment is only for patients
who are seriously ill it's not a game
changer but it is a potential treatment
so a very important proof-of-concept
several Canadian hospitals including
Toronto Sunnybrook are now part of
ongoing studies into remedy severe in
the fight against kovat 19 the drug is
offering a rare glimmer of hope Jackson
Prosecco Global News Washington Fort
McMurray fight to stop floodwaters
coming up how people are joining forces
to save their community there's some
good news tonight for residents in Fort
McMurray Alberta an ice jam on the
Athabasca River there that was
contributing to all the flooding has
shrunk to about half its original size
more than 1,200 structures though have
been damaged by all the flooding and it
could be a week or more before the
nearly thirteen thousand people forced
out can go back dallas flex Hogg is in
Fort McMurray tonight where people are
working together through the worst
Dallas this is being called a
once-in-a-century fly then with the
chance for more flooding the city can't
even begin to think about recovering yet
many are stepping up to help out in any
way they can
historical buildings downtown were saved
from flood water because volunteers
stacked up thousands of sandbags to save
them the same group is handing out food
now to the volunteers still on the
ground and with the city's food bank
under water this makeshift carwash Bay
has turned into a pickup location many
of the volunteers handing out essential
food and supplies or vacuous themselves
I've not heard one person say I'm giving
up I've know everybody says we're tired
but I've not heard one person say we're
giving up your port Mack is gonna fight
on it's gonna stay strong it's hard to
feel
happy about it but you know there's
always a little bit of bright bright
side to everything you know when you see
the community come together like this
and help one another out and it makes
you feel good to say that you come for
Fort McMurray Fort McMurray Mayor John
Scott was asked if he hates being mayor
right now through this and he said no he
couldn't be prouder at watching everyone
double down on Hope Donna all right
Dallas flex hog in Fort McMurray thanks
still ahead Russia under pressure as the
prime minister tests positive
the man who is tasked with leading a
response to kovat 19 in Russia is now
sick himself Prime Minister Mikhail
moo-hoo schtum tested positive on the
same day Russia had a record spike in
new cases more than 7,000 today that
brings the total confirmed cases to one
hundred and six thousand President
Vladimir Putin has warned Russia is
entering the most intense stage of the
pandemic and health workers are
reporting shortages of protective gear
next wishing captain Tom Moore a happy
100th he did it captain Tom Moore turned
100 today and the whole world is sending
him best wishes he's received about a
hundred and twenty thousand cards
including a special one from the Queen
it was just six years behind him she
congratulate him for raising more than
30 million pounds for Britain's National
Health Service by walking laps in his
garden
crystal commencing on the celebration he
never expected
captain Tom Moore is a UK treasure
without handshakes or hugs expressions
of admiration for the second world war
veteran took all forms artistic grant
and heartfelt there is a letter here
that conveys your appointment to become
the honorary colonel of our Army
Foundation College up in Harrogate even
with his new title he says he's still
captain Tom something all of the mural
artists will be glad to hear he even has
the attention of the royal family he's a
one-man on raising machine it's not just
that he has managed to become the
largest single fundraiser for the
National Health Service or that he is
the oldest person to have a number-one
hit in the UK by walking 100 laps in his
backyard before his birthday he's
inspired people your heroic efforts have
lifted the spirits of the entire nation
as a tribute to the 100 year olds a
birthday flying today
yeah phrase presents and gratitude for
those who walk into our lives even if
they are standing two meters away
crystal de Manson global news
[Music]
and that is global national for this
Thursday I'm Donna Friesen we leave you
tonight with gratitude and condolences
for the families of those killed and
missing in that military helicopter
crash off the coast of Greece here at
home we turn to the forces and times of
flood fire or other natural disasters
they never say no they all wisp it their
shoulders to the wheel the women and men
of the Canadian Armed Forces are the
hand of our intentions the concrete
expression of our valor and values as
Canadians and so we stand with them and
we hold out hope to find the missing
[Music]